you might want to take a closer look
there's more to this painting than meets
the eye and yes it's acrylic painting of
a man but I didn't paint it on canvas I
painted it directly on top of the man
what I do in my art is I skip the canvas
altogether and if I want to paint your
portrait I'm painting it on you
physically on you
that also means you're probably gonna
end up with an earful of paint because I
need to paint your ear on your ear
everything in the scene the person the
clothes chairs wall gets covered in a
mask of paint that mimics what's
directly below it and in this way I'm
able to take a three-dimensional scene
and make it look like a two-dimensional
painting I can photograph it from any
angle and it will still look 2d there's
no Photoshop here this is just a photo
of one of my three-dimensional paintings
you might be wondering how I came up
with this idea of turning people into
paintings but originally this had
nothing to do with either people or
paint it was about shadows I was
fascinated in the absence of light and I
wanted to find a way that I could give
it materiality and pin it down before it
changed I came up with the idea of
painting shadows I loved that I could
hide within this shadow my own painted
version and it would be almost invisible
until the light changed and all of a
sudden my shadow would be brought to the
light I wanted to think about what else
I could put shadows on and I thought of
my friend Bernie but I didn't just want
to paint the shadows I also want to
paint the highlights and create a
mapping on his body and greyscale I had
a very specific vision of what this
would look like and as I was painting
him I made sure to follow that very
closely but something kept on flickering
before my eyes I wasn't quite sure what
I was looking at and then when I took
that moment to take a step back magic
I had turned my friend into a painting I
couldn't have foreseen that when I
wanted to paint a shadow I would pull
out this whole other dimension that I
would collapse it that I would take a
painting and make it my friend and then
bring him back to a painting I was a
little conflicted though because I was
so excited about what I found but I was
just about to graduate from college with
a degree in political science and I had
always had this dream of going to
Washington DC and sitting at a desk and
working in government ah why did this
have to get in the way of all that I
made the tough decision of going home
after graduation and not going up to
Capitol Hill but going down to my
parents basement and making it my job to
learn how to paint I had no idea where
to begin the last time I painted I was
16 years old at summer camp and I didn't
want to teach myself how to paint by
copying the old masters or stretching a
canvas and practicing over and over
again on that surface because that's not
what this project was about for me it
was about space and light my early
canvases ended up being things that you
wouldn't expect to be used as campus
like fried food it's nearly impossible
to get paint to stick to the grease in
an egg even harder with getting paint to
stick to the acid in a grapefruit
it just would erase my brushstrokes like
invisible ink I put something down and
instantly it would be gone and if I
wanted to paint on people well I was a
little bit embarrassed to bring people
down to my studio and show them that I
spent my days in a basement putting
paint on toast it just seemed like it
made more sense to practice by painting
on myself one of my favorite models
actually ended up being a retired old
man who not only didn't mind sitting
still and
getting the paint in his ears but he
also didn't really have much
embarrassment about being taken out into
very public places for exhibition like
the Metro I was having so much fun with
this process I was teaching myself how
to paint in all these different styles
and I wanted to see what else I could do
with it I came together with the
collaborator Sheila band and we had the
idea of creating paintings in a more
unusual surface and that was milk we got
a pool we filled it with milk we filled
it with Sheila and I began painting and
the images were always completely
unexpected in the end because I could
have a very specific image about how it
would turn out I could paint it to match
that but the moment that Sheila laid
back into the milk everything would
change it was in constant flux and we
had to rather than fight it embrace it
see where the milk would take us and
compensate to make it even better
sometimes when Sheila would lay down in
the milk it would wash all the paint off
of her arms and it might seem a little
bit clumsy but our solution would be
okay
hide your arms and one time she got so
much milk in her hair that it just
smeared all the paint off of her face
all right well hide your face and we
ended up with something far more elegant
than we could have imagined even though
this is essentially the same solution
that frustrated kid uses when he can't
draw hands hiding them in the pocket
when we started out on the milk project
and when I started out I couldn't have
foreseen that I would go from pursuing
my dream and politics and working at a
desk to tripping over a shadow and then
turning people into paintings and
painting on people in a pool of milk but
then again I guess it's also not
unforeseeable that you can find the
strange and the familiar as long as
you're willing to look beyond what's
already been brought to light so you can
see what's below the surface hiding in
the shadows and recognize that
can be more there than meets the eye
thank you
[Applause]
[Music]